---
layout: post
title:  "Electronic Flight Instrument System (EFIS)"
date:   2017-11-27 21:12:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

**Electronic Flight Instrumentation System (EFIS)**

# Graphical Display Units (GDUs)

 * Usually two identical display units, left one called the **Primary Flight Display
   (PFD)**, right one the **Multi-Function Display (MFD)**.
 * Also normally an avionics control panel (often between), and standby instruments for
   airspeed, attitude, and altitude, and a direct-reading magnetic compass.
 * Behind each GDU is a **self-contained computer** which process inputs from various
   sources and displays results on screen.

**Primary Flight Display (PFD)**

 * Provides the same information as traditional six pack instrumentation. Typically:
    * Attitude fills the background of the screen.
    * Horizontal Situation Indicator (HSI) is displayed at the bottom centre of the screen
      (in place of the heading indicator).
       * Indicates heading plus a digital heading readout above the compass rose, as well as
         ADF/VOR/ILS and DME information.
    * Airspeed and altitude as vertical strips on the sides of the screen.
    * VSI as a vertical strip with a pointer indicating rate of change.

**Multi-Function Display (MFD)**

 * Normally used in navigation mode with a moving map based on GPS information, including a
   number of overlays.
 * **Engine Indicating System** normally on the left side of the MFD.
 * Also serves as a backup in case of PDF failure. In this case, would normally be
   automatically switched to a PDF with engine indications. The switch can be made manually
   if required.

# Signal Generator

 * Visual displays are produced by the *signal generator*, which is part of the computer
   behind each GDU.
 * Signal generator receives data inputs from the pilot, signals from sensors, and EFIS
   format selections made by the pilot.
 * Other names: *symbol generator, display processing computer*.

**System Inputs**

 * Some sensors may produce analog information (eg. air pressure change) which must be
   converted into digital form.
 * Other sensors are designed to measure raw information (eg. solid-state magnometer) and
   convert it to a digital signal before transmission.
 * Following is a brief description of some of the units which may be used in the EFIS.

# Air Data Computer

 * Recieves the measurement of **static and pitot pressure, total air temperature (TAT)**
   from the *TAT head* (or otherwise outside air temperature from the OAT probe), and
   possibly **angle of attack (AOA)** from the AOA probe.
 * It uses this raw data to calculate *altitude, vertical speed, CAS, TAS, AOA, total and
   static air temperature, and (if required) Mach number.
 * This is transmitted digitally to the EFIS and other units requiring this information for
   their own calculations.

# Attitude and Heading Reference System (AHRS)

 * An AHRS is an **electronic solid-state three-axis system** which provides **heading,
   attitude, and yaw information**.
 * Replaces traditional gyroscopic flight instruments, better reliability and accuracy.
 * Called a **'strapdown system'** - the unit and sensors are rigidly fixed to the aircraft
   and retain their orientation to the airframe (compared to AI or HI, which retain their
   orientation in space as the aircraft moves around them).

There are multiple types:

**Ring-Laser Gyroscopes**

 * Best type of AHRS. Incredibly accurate but at the cost of weight and expense.
 * Unlikely to be found on GA aircraft.

**Vibrating Structure Gyroscopes**

 * Sometimes also called Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems, or **MEMS Gyroscopes**.
 * AHRS based on these are of reasonable cost, small, light, and have better accuracy and
   durability than traditional gyroscopes with rotors and bearings.
 * Well suited for EFIS in GA.

# Magnetometer

 * Magnetometer = any device which senses the direction of Earth's electric field.
 * In aviation, a **flux valve magnetometer** has been used for decades as the magnetic
   detector in conjunction with a conventional gyroscope to provide a stable reference
   indication of magnetic heading, eg. in the **Radio Magentic Indicator (RMI)**.

**The magnetic sensor most likely in an AHRS today is a flux valve.**

 * Usually mounted as far away from magnetic interference as possible, eg. outer wing.

Some solid-state three-axis magnetometers have recently been developed and certified for
GA use, likely to see more in the future.

These strap-down magnometers provide an accurate magnetic heading, as well as declination
(angle of dip) and vertical and horizontal components of the Earth's magnetic field.

# Avionics

 * Will normally be controlled through the EFIS.
 * Normally includes VHF comms, VHF Nav/localiser, GPS and GPS glideslope, transponder, ADF,
   DME, TAWS, weather radar or storm scope.

# Engine Performance Data

 * Most engine and ancillary systems sensors provide analog data, which must be converted to
   a digital signal.
 * This is done by the **engine/airframe unit**.
 * In cases where this hasn't been done (eg. with a retrofitted EFIS), the old analog
   instrument may be retained.

# Redundancy

 * Where there are two GDUs, the *inputs from each unit will be duplicated and routed
   independently to each GDU.*
 * Failure of one of the **Line Replaceable Units (LRUs)** will be detected and 'flagged' by
   the EFIS with a warning message. The pilot must make a decision about how or whether to
   proceed.
 * Failure of one of the units which cross-referenceswith another unit (eg. AHRS, which uses
   data from the ADC) may take a greater part of the display out of action, and require
   reading from standby instruments.
 * Complete failure of one GDU will result in the remaining GDU working in a PFD plus engine
   function mode. There will be a manual method to do this in case the automatic failover
   doesn't occur.
 * **In case of engine failure, electrical supply for the EFIS relies on battery power.**
   This can be extended by switching off non-essential electrical items.
 * There is a **solid state emergency battery** in case of alternator and battery failure,
   this provides enough time for an *emergency landing.*
