---
layout: post
title:  "The Engine (2)"
date:   2017-11-07 21:25:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# Measuring Power Output

 * With *fixed-pitch* propellors during *level flight or climbs*, the *tachometer*
   (RPM gauge) generally indicates power output - more RPM = more power output.
 * During *descent* the oncoming airstream helps drive the propellor, and the
   tachometer no longer gives a good indication of power output.
 * With *variable-pitch* propellors, the *combination of tachometer and mainfold
   pressure gauges* indicate power output. We'll discuss these later.

# Valves & Valve Timing

 * The intake and exhaust valves must open and close at the correct times. This is
   done through a **camshaft**, usually gear-driven by the *crankshaft*.
 * **The camshaft rotates at *half* crankshaft speed** (ie. two piston cycles for
   each camshaft cycle).
 * It operates *push rods* and *rocker arms* which open the appropriate valve
   (against spring pressure) at the right time.
 * A typical cruise engine speed is 2400RPM, with the propellor of most GA aeroplanes
   connected directly to the crankshaft. This means the camshaft rotates at 1200RPM,
   or 20 rotations (and therefore 20 open/closes of the valves) per second.

**Valve Timing - Valve Lead and Valve Lag**

The amount of power developed by the engine depends on how much fuel-air mixture can
enter the cylinder during the induction stroke. From above we see the time the
inlet valve is open is very brief.

As the four-stroke engine developed, it turned out to be more efficient if the
intake valve was opened *just prior* to reaching *top-dead-center (TDC)*, and
closed *after* the piston had gone past *bottom-dead-center (BDC)*. This allows
more time for induction. This early opening is called **valve lead.**

Similarly, effiency is increased during the exhaust stroke by opening the exhaust
valve just *prior* to reaching BDC, and closed just *after* reaching TDC. This
late closing is called **valve lag.**

The short period of time around TDC where both valves are open is called
**valve overlap.**

The combination of lead, lag, and overlap allow the engine to 'breathe' better,
and produce a greater amount of power for a given amount of fuel in the mixture.
