---
layout: post
title:  "Airframes"
date:   2017-09-18 11:32:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# Structural Integrity of Airframes

The following notes give a general indication of what to look for when
checking the structural integrity of an airframe.

**Aluminium Alloy ('Stressed Skin') Airframes**

 * Aluminium alloy skin provides a significant portion of the structural
   strength, along with the framework it's attached to.
 * Designed to be **fail-safe**:
    * **Fail safe**: constructed in a way that overstressing will result
      in *gradual* failure of *part* of the structure, not a catastrophic
      failure of the whole.
 * Relatively flexible, due to the material being flexible.
 * Can be stretched, but buckles when compressed.
 * Susceptible to fatigue - repeated bending or stretching is likely to
   eventually fail.
 * Different aluminium allows are manufactured for different properties,
   eg. more resistant to corrosion, greater strength under compression.

Preflight:

 * Because the alumnium alloy skin generally covers the substructure
   (frame), pre-flighting is often limited to an external inspection.
 * Look for:
    * Any cracks in the skin.
    * Any popped or loose rivets.
    * Fretting (movement) between airframe components.
    * Buckling in the skin.
    * Distortion of airframe components, eg. panels that don't fit
      properly.


**Composite Structures**

 * Lighter than equivalent structures made of metal, but also stiffer
   and less prone to *fatigue* and *corrosion*, ie. more durable.
 * Not **ductile** like aluminium alloy, meaning it won't dent from
   small stones or hail like alumnium alloy does.
 * **Most common cause of failure is delamination** - separation of
   plies due to failure of the bonding matrix. May be caused during the
   manufacturing process, moisture, or heavy impacts. Can be difficult
   to detect.

Preflight:

Looking for delamination can be difficult, although non-desctructive
tests can be performed by maintenance. During preflight on a composite
airframe, look for:

 * Dull areas, or ones with a whitish colour compared to the surrounding.
   In bad cases, may appear as a bubble, depression, or cracking.
 * Light tapping on the surface may sound different to the surrounding
   surface.
 * Any areas with exposed fibres, caused by impact damage, lightning,
   components rubbing together, or high heat.


**Fabric Covered Airframes**

 * Earliest aircraft used an organic fabric, like cotton or linen, glued to
   the airframe and tensioned by applying dope.
 * **Dope** is a plasticised lacquer which glues, penetrates, tautens, and
   protects the fabric.
 * Later aircraft almost always use a heat-shrunk polyester fabric, which is
   stronger, lighter, and longer-lasting than cotton or linen.
 * In either case, the doped fabric is reinforced by pop-rivets, screws,
   or rib lacings, generally covered by tapes. The whole surface is then
   doped and have final coatings applied for protection.

 * Aerodynamic force generated by fabric-covered aircraft is transmitted by
   the fabric through areas connected to the airframe.
 * Fabric covering is limited by the amount of force it can withstand
   without bursting, so it's restricted to aircraft with relatively low
   never exceed speeds, and low wing loadings.

Deterioration

 * Ultra-violet light, moisture (mildew/mould), pollution, spilled aircraft
   fluids, battery acid, fumes, time and usage all contribute to deterioration.
 * Prevention can include hangaring the aircraft (instead of leaving it
   exposed to sunlight and rain), regular washing, cleaning spills
   immediately.
 * If all the above is done, fabric coverings can last up to 30 years. The
   covering may need to be removed before then to facilitate airframe inspection.
 * Maintenance engineers have portable equipment to test fabric tensile-strength
   non-destructively. When these indicate the tensile strength has fallen
   below a certain level, the whole fabric covering requires replacement.

Preflight:

 * Condition of all seams and lapped joints.
 * Surface tapes securely doped in place.
 * Lacing cords checked for failure and tightness.
 * Drain holes unobstructed.
 * Cuts, tears, other damage.
 * Any sign of dope separation: whorls, cracks, splits.
