---
layout: post
title:  "Fuel"
date:   2017-11-13 21:41:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# Fuel Grades

 * Aviation Gasoline (AVGAS) is manufactured and managed under more stringent
   quality control standards than Motor Gasoline (MOGAS).
 * In general, AVGS is more 'leaded' than MOGAS, giving a *higher octane*
   (performance rating) to *delay the onset of detonation.* It is *less
   volatile* than MOGAS, reducing vapour lock problems at altitude.

**Different Grades, Colour Coding**

(Fuel Grade |  Colour)

MOGAS (91, 95) | Purple, Yellow
100LL | Blue
100/130 | Green
115/145 | Purple

**NB. at the time of writing, 100/130 is the only grade of AVGAS available for
using in light aircraft in New Zealand.**

 * Figures used in the grading relate to the *anti-detonation* (or
   *anti-knock*) qualities of the particular fuel, loosely referred to as its
   **octane rating**.
    * Stricly speaking, 100 and *below* are an 'octane rating', 100 and *above*
      are a 'performance number'.
 * *Where two numbers are given*, the higher is a measure of the **power
   potential** (compared to the 'standard reference fuel') before the onset
   of detonation, the **lower** is a measure of power possible before the same
   detonation with the fuel **leaned out**.

# AVGAS Additives (Lead)

 * The relatively high octane ratings/performance numbers of AVGAS come from
   adding certain amounts of **tetraethyl lead** to the fuel (100LL has less
   lead, and other additives are added instead to maintain its anti-knock
   characteristics).
 * All grades of fuel tend to cause spark plug fouling due to lead deposits,
   particularly when operated for long periods of time at low power (eg.
   cruise or descent) and/or with low cylinder head temperatures.
    * **Under these conditions, it's good airmanship to operate with the
      cylinder head temperature at the high end of the normal operating range,
      or increase power periodically, eg. during a long descent.**

Use of a **higher grade fuel than recommended** increases chances of plug
fouling, and can lead to corrosion of exhaust valves and seats in older engines.

Use of a **lower grade fuel than recommended** increases risk of detonation,
particularly at high power settings.

Use of **time expired fuel** loses some of its anti-detonation qualities, and
its octane rating falls (ie. becomes a lower grade fuel = detonation etc).

# Caution using MOGAS

 * AVGAS is sold in batches and subject to strict quality control. MOGAS isn't
   subject to the same quality control.
 * MOGAS is more volatile and vaporises more readily, therefore more likely to
   cause vapour locks.
 * MOGAS can also cause lower power output, fouling spark plugs, and possibility
   of detonation.

**Do not use MOGAS unless specifically authorised.**

# Caution using Aviation Turbin Fuel (AVTUR)

 * Turbine (jet) engines use AVTUR, is straw-coloured or clear, and smells
   like kerosene.
 * **It must *not* be used in piston engines** (including turbo-charged).
 * In addition to different look and smell, *fuelling equipment* has colour-
   coded labelling:
    * Jet-fuel decals with 'AVTUR' in white letters on black.
    * AVGAS has decals with 'AVGAS' or octane rating (eg. 100/130) in white
      letters on red.

# Fuel Contaminants

 * It is the responsibility of the oil company to ensure no contaminants are
   in the fuel at time of delivery, and sometimes while in client's holding
   tanks. *When fuel is uplifted, responsibility becomes the operator's.*
 * The most common contaminant is water. This can come from:
    * Leaking into ground fuel tanks.
    * Leaking through fuel caps (not secured, or worn seals).
    * The fuel itself, or air above in the tanks. Both of these contain
      water which can condense with drops in ambient temperature.
 * Overnight, a drop in temperature can cause air to condense and result in
   condensation on the inside of the tanks. This is **less likely to happen
   with full tanks.**

# Fuel Drums

 * Fuel from fuel drums requires extra care. They can easily become contaminated
   by water, either from leakage or condensation, or by other things like dirt
   or rust flakes.
 * If being used for **fuel storage**, they should be filled to the brim and
   *stored on their sides* to cover the inside of the bungs and help prevent
   ingress of air.
 * Fuel pumps used with drums should be fitted with an **approved in-line
   filter**, which can absorb any moistore and remove particulate matter.
 * Modern practice is to avoid using a chamois leather strainer in a funnel
   (particularly synthetic chamois), which have been found to be a **static-
   electricity hazard.**
 * **If use of a chamois is necessary**:
    * Ensure all items are electrically bonded.
    * Refuel slowly
 * Only use *approved plastic containers* for storage. Use of non-approved
   plastic containers is dangerous.

# Fuel Checks

 * Water is more dense, and will gather at the low points of the system. These
   appear as small globules in the strained fuel in the strainer.
 * If fuel is checked and OK, empty the strainer in to the receptacle provided.
   **Do not empty back into the tanks.**
 * If not OK (eg. water's found), empty the container and carry out a further
   check.
 * If a large quantity of water is found, a maintenance engineer should be
   called in to clear it. If none's available, continue draining until the
   water is gone. It may be necessary to *rock the wings* to get the water to
   move to the sump and drain cock.
 * After checks, make sure all drains are closed and not leaking.

# Refuelling

 * Check the fuel is the correct type.
 * Position the aircraft as far away from buildings and other aircraft as
   practicable. If not too windy, park brake should be off.
 * Engine is off, ignition switches are OFF.
 * No smoking.
 * Keep observers clear.
 * Ensure aircraft and fuelling equipment are electrically bonded and earthed.
   Do this **before removing the fuel caps** because fuel vapour can enter the
   atmosphere.
    * Bonding is to ensure all eletrical components are at the same electrical
      potential and reduce chance of a spark.
    * *When using a torch*, switch it on well away from the filler caps for the
      same reason.
 * Do not refuel with an **electrical storm** in the vicinity.
 * Do not rest the nozzle on the intake of the neck. This can result in cracking.
 * In wet or dusty conditions, make effort to keep these out of the tanks.
 * Refit caps properly after refuelling.
 * **Complete refuelling documentation.** This would be vital if the aircraft
   becomes overdue on its next flight.

**Note on dipping tanks**: dipsticks are calibrated for a specific aircraft,
use the specific stick for yours.

# Further Reading

 * CAA GAP Publication: "Fuel Management".
 * CAA Vector Sep/Oct 2005 article: "Dangers of Static".  
