---
layout: post
title:  "Airframe"
date:   2017-09-14 12:19:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# Fuselage

The fuselage is the body of the aircraft to which the other components (wings,
tail, engine, landing gear) are attached.

The most common type of construction is the **semi-monocoque** (stressed skin),
consisting of a light metal framework usually covered by an aluminium alloy
skin riveted to it. The internal framework carries most (but not all) of the stress.
A **monocoque** structure has no internal framework, skin carries the stress.

**Truss-type** fuselages are fabric-covered (usually on older aeroplanes).
Members are usually wood or welded tube steel.

**Composites** are increasingly used. They're a combination of materials to
form a new material with required characteristics. Typical examples:

 * Glass fibre reinforced plastics (GFRPs)
 * Carbon fibre reinforced plastics (CFRPs)

Sometimes referred to as **polymers** instead of plastics.

The glass or carbon fibres are usually woven as a cloth ('**ply**'). During
fabrication is embedded and bound together in a resin (the '**matrix**'), and
placed over a mould until the resin cures and hardens in shape. Several
layers of plies may be embedded in the matrix. *The direction of fibres is
arrange to give the greatest strength in a given direction.*

Advantages of composites:

 * High strength for reduced weight.
 * Better resistance to fatigue, corrsion, impact damage.

Disadvantages:

 * Relatively high cost of raw materials.

# Wings

Wings are designed to create higher pressure below and lower pressure above,
creating lift. In normal flight, lifting forces bend the wing upward. On the
ground they tend to droop under their own weight.

**Wing Components:**

 * **Spars**: Attached to the fuselage, extend to wingtips. Carry the main load.
 * **Struts**: on some light aircraft. External connection to fuselage to provide
   extra strength by transferring wing load from wing roots (spar attachment
   point(s)) to other parts of the fuselage.
 * **Ribs**: Provide the aerofoil shape. Attached to spars. Along with
   **stringers** (which run perpendicular to the ribs, and parallel to the spars,
   but are smaller) support the skin of the wing.
 * **Ailerons**: Control surfaces attached to the *outer* trailing edge.
 * **Flaps**: When fitted, normally on the *inner* trailing edge.
 * **Fuel Tanks**: Installed in the wing in most light aircraft. In high-wing
   aircraft, enables use of gravity-fed fuel systems.

Aircraft with one set of wings are **monoplanes**, can be high-, mid-, or
low-wing. **Biplanes** have a double set of wings.

# Tail Section (Empennage)

 * Fin: (vertical stabilizer), with rudder.
 * Tailplane: (horizontal stabilizer), with elevator.

Other variations include an all-moving taiplane called a **stabilator** with
no separate elevator, or a 'V-tail' combining rudder and elevator. Others
(eg. Piper Tomahawk) have a high T-tail with the tailplane mounted at the
top of the fin.

**Trim tabs** may be fitted to elevator (common) and rudder (less common),
a small control surface to aerodynamically balance the surface and eliminate
the need to hold the control input.
