---
layout: post
title:  "Lubrication & Cooling"
date:   2017-11-14 22:38:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# The Oil System

 * Lubrication reduces friction between moving parts.
 * In piston aero-engines, *mineral oil* is used.
 * In air-cooled engines especially, also transfers heat away from hot engine
   parts.

The oil system has three main functions:

 * Lubrication.
 * Cooling.
 * Cleaning.

**Lubrication**

 * This is the main function, prevents metal-to-metal contact of moving parts,
   preventing high temperatures and rapid wear. *An engine running without
   oil is likely to seize or suffer mechanical failure after a short time.*

**Cooling**

 * Oil is pumped under pressure from its storage area, through pipes and
   'galleries', to and around the areas it's needed. Internal areas of the engine
    are also splashed or sprayed.
 * Oil flow assists cooling of all parts, but **especially the lower parts of
   the hot sections:**
    * Piston skirts.
    * Cylinder walls.
    * Main and big-end bearings.
 * Oil circulating around these areas absorbs heat, then dissipates as it flows
   through the oil cooler.

**Cleaning**

 * Dirt, grit, combustion products, and possibly metal flakes find their way
   into the interior of the engine, and can potentially cause abrasive wear.
 * Oil can pick most of this up and removed in the oil filter. It's important
   the oil filter is kept clean and changed regularly.

**Dirty oil = increased wear, poorer cooling, reduced engine life.**

Secondary functions of oil are **sealing** and **cushioning.** Eg. oil bewtween
pistons and cylinder walls seals the combustion chamber. Oil between gudgeon
pins and big-end bearings helps cushion shocks generated by forces.

# Properties of Oil

 * Oils come in different viscosities, high = thick, low = thin. As temperature
   decreases the viscosity drops and it flows more freely.
 * Oil for a particular engine must:
    * Not be so viscous it can't flow when cold;
    * Not be so thin the protective layer breaks when hot.

**Excessively high temperatures reduce the effectiveness of oil as a lubricant.**

 * Oils are graded under a *Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) rating, the
   POH will show the oil grade as an SAE rating.
 * **However** - commercial aviation oil has a **commercial aviation number**
   which is **double the SAE rating**:
    * 80 grade oil = SAE 40
    * 100 grade oil = SAE 50


