---
layout: post
title:  "GPS"
date:   2017-11-27 21:58:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# GPS

 * GPS is one system used in the **Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)**. GPS is the
   most pertinent to New Zealand, so will cover that here.
 * Owned by the US DoD, who provide unlimited civilian access on a no-cost basis under terms
   of a letter of agreement between the DoD and ICAO.

**Basic Principle of Operation**

 * GPS consists of at least **24 satellites orbiting the earth at just over 20,200km
   (10,900 nm)**.
 * 4 satellites orbit in each of 6 orbital planes.
 * There are usually at least 3 extra satellites available as operational spares.
 * Each orbital plane is inclined at an angle of 55 degrees to the equator.
 * **Each satellite takes approximately 12 hours to complete an orbit.**
 * The orbital planes are fixed in space - the earth rotates within the constellation.

**Control Segment**

 * Includes **monitoring stations** at various locations around the world, **ground
   antennas**, **uplinks**, and a **master station** located as Colorado Springs.
 * The stations track all satellites in view and pass information to the master station,
   which controls the clock and orbit states of the satellites, and currency of their
   navigation messages.
 * Each satellite sends a signal containing a **navigation message** and **unique coded
   signal which repeats itself every millisecond.**
    * The signal takes several seconds to receive, and is used by the reciever to update
      its **almanac database** (orbital data for the entire constellation), the position
      of the transmitting satellite, and GPS clock reference (to enable synchronisation
      of the GPS receiver clock).
    * The pseudo-random coded signal is used for *ranging* from that particular satellite.

**Ranging**

 * Measured by measuring time between transmission and receiving of each satellite's
   psuedo-random code, and multiplying that by the speed of light.
 * GPS receiver does this by generating the identical code internally at the same time
   as the satellite transmits it. By matching this with the signal received from the
   satellite, the time of travel can be established.
 * Timing is critical, and provided by sychronised high-precision atomc clocks in the
   satellites.

**Fixing Position**

 * A satellite signal which has travelled for a given time can be represented by a range
   sphere around that satellite.
 * Where that sphere intersects the earth, a **curved position line** is generated on the
   surface.
 * This tells the receiver it could be anywhere on that line.
 * With two satellites, there are *two points of intersection*, and the receiver could be
   at either of those.
 * To obtain an unambiguous fix on the surface of the earth, the receiver must know the
   range from *three satellites*.

**To calculate a *fix* and *altitude*, the range of at least *four satellites* must be
known.**

# GPS Receivers

 * There are a larger number of GPS receivers available.
 * **To be certified as a primary *or supplemental* IFR navigation system** they must be
   meet the provisions of **FAA Technical Service Order (TSO) CS129**.
    * This specifies requirements for multiple receiver channels, and an integrity
      monitoring system: **Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring (RAIM).**
    * These units provide an assurance of accuracy required for IFR navigation, and
      display an error message if RAIM determines the GPS can't be relied on.
 * There are currently no certifications required for VFR GPS receivers.
 * With an in-panel mounted unit with an antenna fixed on the aircraft, a **maximum
   position error of approximately 18 metres** could be expected **95% of the time**
   under normal operating conditions.
    * If the unit doesn't have RAIM fitted, it could be much greater than this on
      occasion, but would be difficult to detect without monitoring - this is the power
      of RAIM.
 * Hand-held units will normally have a built in antenna with possibly lower accuracy.
   The accuracy can also be affected by loss of signal when shielded by parts of the
   aircraft.
 * GPS positions relate to maps and charts drawn to the global datum of the **World
   Geodetic Survey (WGS 84).**
 * Another error comes from *trying to relate GPS position to a position on a non-WGS 48
   map.**
 * **Charts drawn with the correct datum for GPS use are annotated 'WGS 84 co-ordinates**.

# ELT

 * Most aircraft in New Zealand are required to be fitted with an ELT.
 * Typically required for GA aircraft is the **406 (AF) type**, meaning the transmitter
   automatically activated when a certain deceleration is experienced and its **G-Switch
   activated**.
 * When activated, transmits continuously on 121.5 MHz, **and every 50 seconds transmits
   a digital message on 406 MHz.**
    * This pulse on 406 MHz is used by the COSPAS-SARSAT satellites for locating the
      position and identifying the aircraft in distress.
    * The 406 MHz signal locates within **2 nm**, the 121.5 MHz is used mainly for homing
      in the final stages of SAR.
 * 406 (AF) type ELTs are usually small, removable, and mounted in the rear of the aircraft.
 * Antenna is normally mounted directly above the unit outside the aircraft.
 * Fixed-antenna units can't be used when removed from the aircraft. Some units have a
   portable antenna allowing it to continue working when removed from the aircraft.
 * 406 (AF) ELTs have their own internal batteries.

**Battery Replacement**

 * If operated continuously for one hour
 * Has undergone intermittent operation totalling one hour (eg. 60 self-tests).

**ELT Operation**

 * There are controls *on* the ELT transmitter which are not normally used, except maybe
   to check the mode is ARM during preflight (if accessible).
 * The mode will have an OFF position, which should only be used when removed for servicing.
 * Have a remote control panel in the cockpit, enabling the pilot to control the unit when
   necessary.
    * Will have positions: ON, ARMED, and a red LED annunciator, plus TEST on
      three-position switches.
 * **In normal operation** - just check the switch is set to **ARM** or **ARMED**, and
   the red annunciator is not flashing.
 * ON should be selected in an emergency if desirable to manually activate the ELT.
 * **When activated** correct operation is indicated by a series of short flashes (for
   121.5 MHz transmission) and a long one every 50 seconds (for 406 MHz transmissions).
 * **If inadvertently activated** - press RESET on the remote control panel, or OFF on the
   unit itself.
    * **Notify ATC and the RCCNZ as soon as possible.**
 * Do not use the self-test function unless trained and authorised to do so.
