---
layout: post
title:  "The Engine"
date:   2017-11-06 21:09:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

Engines come in two main categories:

 * Piston
 * Gas Turbine (jet engines)

We'll discuss piston engines here, and cover gas turbines (briefly) later.

# Engine Configurations

 * **Radial:** cylinders arranged in a circle around the crankshaft.
 * **In-Line:** cylinders arranged in one or more lines (same as most cars).
   Generally an older style, came with either the cylinder heads at the top
   and crankshaft/propellor shaft at the bottom, or **inverted in-line**
   engines with the crankshaft/propellor shaft at the top. This gave *better
   positioning of the thrust line* and *better propellor ground clearance.*
 * **Horizontally Opposed:** most common in general aviation today, usually
   air-cooled. 2, 4, or 8 cylinders arranged horizonally on opposing sides
   of the crankshaft. Advantages are:
    * Low bulk & streamlining to reduce drag;
    * Ease of cooling;
    * High power to weight ratio;
    * Good thrust line positioning with good balance of propellor ground
      clearance and visibility.

Reciprocating (piston) engines are **internal combustion**, operate in a
**four-stroke cycle**, and use **aviation gasoline (AVGAS).**

# Basic Piston Engine Principles

 * Pistons move up and down in gas-tight cylinders, where a mixture of
   vaporised fuel and air is burned.
 * Combustion of the mixture pushes the piston down, which is converted to
   a rotational movement of the crankshaft and propellor it's attached to.
 * The *chemical energy* of the fuel is converted to *heat energy* by
   burning it, then into *mechanical energy* of the piston, crankshaft,
   and propellor.

# Four-Stroke ('Otto') Cycle

*Also called the Otto Cycle, after inventor Nicholas Otto, 1876.

 1. **Intake:** inlet valve opens, fuel-air mixture is sucked into the
    cylinder. As the piston descends, *pressure in the cylinder is reduced*,
    and the mixture flows in due to the higher pressure in the **intake
    manifold** (series of pipes leading the mixture from the carburettor
    to each cylinder).
 2. **Compression:** inlet valve closes, piston moves toward the cylinder
    head and compresses the mixture. Compression causes the temperature to
    rise considerably.
 3. **Power:** as the compression stroke is finishing, spark plugs ignite
    the mixture and *controlled combustion* begins. The mixture ignites and
    expands rapidly, pushing the piston down with considerable force.
 4. **Exhaust:** exhaust valve opens and the piston moves back up the
    cylinder, pushing the burnt gases out the exhaust valve and into the
    **exhaust manifold.**

# Flywheel

Note that only one of the four strokes provides power to move the crankshaft.
In a *single cylinder* engine the power stroke needs to provide enough
power to keep the pistong moving through the other three strokes. For a
single cylinder engine, a heavy *flywheel* is normally attached to the
crankshaft to maintain rotational inertia.

In most **four-cylinder engines**, the power strokes are positioned at
different times to keep the rotation smooth. Note that for a four-cylinder
engine, **power is delivered four times during a two-rotation cycle of
the crankshaft** (makes sense - the piston in each cycle goes up twice
and down twice).
