---
layout: post
title:  "The Engine (3)"
date:   2017-11-07 21:57:00
categories: nz-ppl
---

# Ignition

 * A high voltage (high tension) spark occurs from the spark plug just
   prior to top-dead-center (TDC). This is called an **advanced spark**
   and allows the flame front to start moving through the compressed air
   charge so the maximum cylinder pressures are developed at the most
   advantageous stage of the power stroke.
 * Most aeroplane engines have dual, independent igntion systems, each
   supplying one of two spark plugs in each cylinder.
 * A dual ignition system:
    1. Provides **redudancy**.
    2. Results in **smoother and more efficient combustion**.

**Magnetos**

 * The *high-tension* electrical current for the spark plugs comes from
   a self-contained engine driven *magneto*. Each ignition system has its
   own magneto.
 * A **distributor** in each magneto distributes the sparks to each plug
   at the right time.
 * Often the high-tension leads are bound together to form an **ignition
   harness.**
 * The operation of each ignition system is controlled by a switch in the
   cockpit.

**Exercise:** try drawing magnetos in a typical configuration:
 * The LH mag fires the top RH plugs, and bottom LH plugs;
 * The RH mag fires the top LH plugs, and bottom RH plugs;
 * ie. *each mag fires the top plugs on the opposite side, and the bottom
   plugs on the same side*.

# The Starter

Almost all modern training aircraft have an **electric** starter powered
by the battery and activated by turning the key to 'START'.

 * A **starter warning light** illuminates when the starter is engaged,
   and should go off when the key (starter) is released from START. If
   not - ie. the starter relay *sticks* **the engine should be stopped**
   to avoid damage to the starter motor.

**On the start up of a cold engine oil pressure sure indicate normally
within 30 seconds.** If not, shut down the engine.

**Impulse Coupling/Disabled Magneto During Start**

 * This is in one magneto (usually left) and generates a high-energy, or
   'hot' spark, and **retards** the spark during starting, while the
   compressed mixture is less hot and needs more time to warm to a
   point where it will combust easily.
 * During start (with the switch in the START position) - the right
   magneto is **temporarily disengaged** to make starting easier. Once the
   switch is released the mag functions normally again, and as the engine
   warms the impulse coupling loses its effectiveness.

# Operational Aspects

 * The engine will run fine on one magneto, but probably not as smoothly
   and there will be a drop in RPM. In this case, only one side of the
   cylinder has spark coming from it, meaning an uneven burn and increased
   time for combustion to occur.
 * With 'L' selected, only the left magneto is running. If a drop in RPM
   doesn't occur, either the right mag isn't grounded and is continuing to
   run, *or* the right mag wasn't operating before switching to L.

**Magneto Checks - 'Dead-Cut' Check (this is new)**

 * Before the high-RPM run up, a **dead-cut check** is done at lower power
   (typically 800-1000RPM). This is witching from BOTH - L - R - BOTH.
 * The purpose is to identify an inoperative magneto at a lower power setting,
   instead of at a higher (run up) power setting where it could damage the
   engine if the magneto is fautly, by shutting down the engine.
 * If a dead cut is experienced, **do not run up the magnetos again at
   higher power.**

**Magneto Checks - Normal**

 * Assuming the dead-cut check is OK, a normal magneto check is carried out
   at high power.
 * The **Pilot's Operating Manual** for the aircraft contains the magneto
   drop limits. A typical engine setting for the check would be 1600RPM.
 * Note the single mag drops, as well as the difference between the two, and
   ensure they're within operating limits set out in the Operating Manual.

**Live Mag Check (P-Lead Check)**

 * When the ignition is set to OFF, L, or R, a lead from the magneto(s)
   grounds the magneto to turn it off. If this lead is faulty the magneto
   will not turn off as expected.
 * To check this, some people perform a 'Live Mag Check' at low RPM, by
   switching the ignition briefly to OFF then back on, and noting the RPM
   drop - indicating the ground leads are working.
 * Some instructors advise against it due to possible aircraft damage. Refer
   to the POH for specific aircraft instructions.

# Electronic (Solid State) Ignition

The previously described *dual-magneto* ignition system is the most commonly
used. Advantages are:

 * Self-contained (no external electrical source);
 * Lightweight;
 * Relative simple and reliable;

Disadvantages are:

 * Fixed spark timing (usually 25 deg before TDC, except when starting);
 * Because they're electro-mechanical, need to be serviced for wear and
   adjustment;

**Electronic ignition systems** are becoming more commonly used. The main
advantage is **automatic adjustment of the spark timing** so it always
occurs at the optimum point for efficient burning of fuel-air charge.

How it works:

 * For most efficient operation, each cylinder needs to develop peak
   pressure at 11 degrees past TDC.
 * As RPM and Manifold Pressure increases or decreases, the spark also
   needs to be advanced or retarded. At high RPM there is less time for
   the charge to be burnt and peak pressure to develop at the right place
   (ie. '11 degrees past TDC' is a shorter period of time).
 * Because burn time is also affected by air density (faster burn at
   higher compression, slower at low compression) the spark also needs to
   be **advanced as MAP is reduced**, and **retarded as MAP is increased.**

Basic System:

 * Three **sensors** feed into a **microprocessor**:
    1. A sensor to tell it when each piston is at TDC;
    2. One to track its position relative to TDC;
    3. One to measure MAP;
 * Normally two **coils** are used:
    * One providing spark to the cylinder nearing the *end of the compression
      stroke* (about to be ignited);
    * One 'wasted spark' to its companion cylinder on the exhaust stroke.
 * The microprocessor triggers the spark, so no distributor is needed. The
   spark is delivered straight from the coil through high-tension leads to
   the sparkplug.
 * **The coils are charged by the electrical system through the battery -
   meaning they will not work in an electrical failure, or low battery.**
 * To provide redudancy, sometimes one magneto system is maintained, and one
   replaced with a solid-state ignition. Other systems have small alternators
   attached to the old magneto drive, to generate indepedent power.
